---
layout: post
title: "\"We Deserve Better Than Black Mirror\""
subtitle: I am so fucking tired of Charlie Brooker's baby boomer fever dream.
---

It's not much of a stretch to say that science fiction as a genre of movies largely tends towards social commentary. Sure, there's always been works like Transformers, but as a whole, sci-fi cinema has an established pattern of discussing otherwise highly charged cultural anxieties in a candid, hypothetical fashion. Science fiction films of the fifties and sixties explored common anxieties around nuclear power and war, with monsters like Godzilla or the 50 Foot Woman the result of experiments gone wrong. The seventies and eighties brought film like Soylent Green and Bladerunner, depicting a society threatened by the very advancements it had itself created - but by the time the nineties rolled around, these had evolved into narratives on technology with classics like Terminator 2 and The Matrix. Oddly enough, it seems like most sci-fi released in the wake of September 11 actually subverted this pattern by avoiding invasion as a subject matter entirely - the only notable exception that comes to mind is Cloverfield, and that wasn't released until 2008. Still, there was an noticable rise in the depiction of surveilance states, alongside a slew of disaster movies like The Day After Tomorrow that were rather unsubtly inspired by a growing debate on climate change.

With all this in mind, I'd like to draw your attention to Black Mirror. If you're unfamiliar, Black Mirror is an anthology television series that sits in something of a grey area between science-fiction and horror. The brain child of Charlie Brooker - a name I only mention now so I can chew him out later - Black Mirror first aired on the BBC for two seasons before moving to Netflix for its third and fourth. Like any other science fiction anthology, comparisons have inevitably been drawn between Black Mirror and the genre defining Twilight Zone, but Black Mirror has made a name for itself by choosing to exclusively depict stories concerning technology. According to Netflix's press kit, Black Mirror "taps into our collective unease with the modern world", literally holding up our phones and computer screens as "a Black Mirror reflecting our 21st Century existence back at us". The show is well produced on a technical level, and between a jet black tone and an abudence of twist endings, Black Mirror has proven remarkably popular. The problem as I see it, however, is that while Black Mirror may claim to show us a candid portrait of modern society, it does so by merely depicting elements of our cultural anxieties in place of offering actual insight. Science fiction might not be under any sort of obligation to offer meaningful social commentary, but Black Mirror is seemingly so determined to criticise technology that it fails to connect with the very social anxieties that inspired it in the first place. 

To tie all this together, yes, Black Mirror certainly seems like a reaction to the rapid growth of the internet over this past decade. The idea that phones and social media are causing us to grow isolated from one another is more or less synonymous with the phrase "back in my day" at this point, but that doesn't mean Black Mirror's obvious cynicism is necessarily without merit. The trouble is, this seems to be the only message that Black Mirror is interested in depicting - although most episodes do seem to start with an open mind and an interesting premise, the conflict is consistently driven by the presence of technology, and this severely limits the direction that any given story can take. Rather than holding characters responsible for their actions, Black Mirror has a habit of implying that technology is at fault, and this is no more obvious than in an episode like The Entire History of You. The episode is centered around an implant that allows characters to replay and project their memories, and although it's unsurprising that a story like this would choose to focus on jealousy and distrust as themes, the way in which the narrative progressive seemingly pins responsibility for this jealousy on the technology itself feels downright strange. Instead of presenting a narrative on the ways that we individually and collectively handle jealousy in relationships, Black Mirror chooses to absolve its characters of any responsibility, telling us that actually, it was technology to blame the whole time. This isn't a one off occurence, either. By consistently framing technology as the constant source of conflict in its stories, by taking every chance it gets to moralise about the dangers of technology, Black Mirror drowns out any actual insight it might have otherwise had to offer.

And I feel confident making this assessment, because the critically lauded episode San Junipero - easily the best that the the series has to offer - is a stubborn subversion of everything Black Mirror is otherwise known for. There's no moralising on the dangers of the internet, no dark twist ending that serves to upend the moral of the story. It's considerably more more optimistic than what we've come to expect, too, but I honestly think the reason this episode works so well is that it only uses technology as a way of contextualising the narrative, rather than presenting technology as the driving source of conflict. There are still vaguely technophobic sentiments here and there, but they're backgrounded and don't overwhelm the message, meaninging that the narrative is exclusively driven by its characters. By the time the credits roll, the audience has been left with something meaningful - not answers, for once, but concepts and themes we're forced to grapple with, and it works in a way no other episode of Black Mirror can hope to match.

To me, that might actually be the most frustrating part. If Black Mirror just got out of its own way and stopped trying to hand us the answers it's looking for, there's no doubt in my mind we'd see more episodes like San Junipero. As it is, we just have a handful of episodes that come *close* to connecting us with our fears. I mean, what if Arkangel had focused on the dilemmas parents undoubtedly face today around raising children in an age of social media? What if Hated in the Nation had explored the way people handle criticism and consequence over their actions online, instead of literally equating call-out culture with murder? What if Hang the DJ had explored the casual dating scene ushered in by apps like Tinder, examining what it's like to be in a relationship that you don't expect to last? These are issues that I _know_ many of us have grappled with, and Black Mirror comes so close to helping us confront them - but every time, its compulsive demonization of technology drowns out any message or insight it might otherwise have had to offer.

What this ends up meaning is that rather than offering us the chance to reflect candidly on our anxieties, Black Mirror handles catharsis in a way much more reminiscent of campy horror. Characters indulge in things that we're all at least a little anxious might be wrong, like sex, drugs, or social media, and then we as an audience feel some sort of relief or distress when we finally see their comeuppance. Which isn't bad so much as it is deceptive. Black Mirror claims to hold up a reflection of our modern society, and what you get certainly _feels_ like cutting introspection, but it's not even close - it's just shock tactics, played on repeat, and the worst part is that Black Mirror's approach is only going to further entrench us in our opinions. It doesn't prompt or enable discussion, it doesn't try to find a middle ground or bridge divides, it just wants to scare you into deleting your Facebook.

And given recent events concerning Facebook and targeted advertising and the extensive profiles that companies have built on us, given the discomfort around social media that I can visibly see growing around me, it seems important now more than ever to actually have these serious conversations - to actually reflect on the role of technology and the internet in our society. Yet somehow, despite all of this, Black Mirror is the only current major science fiction property that's plugged into these anxieties. Other sci-fi in recent years like Westworld and Ex Machina have touched on the subject, but instead largely focus the artificial intelligence, meaning that even if they do have insight to offer, Black Mirror is still what we joke about when Google does something sinister. We don't need good sci-fi to deal with issues as a society, of course, but we've come as a culture to connect with others through our entertainment, and the fact that Black Mirror has become the de-facto frame of reference for discussions on the role of technology in our society has made it that much harder to talk about these issues in a meaningful way.
