---
layout: post
title: "Charlie Brooker's Baby Boomer Fever Dream"
subtitle: Some thoughts on Black Mirror.
---

We need to have a serious talk about the role of technology in our society. Just... not like this.

---

It's not much of a stretch to say that science fiction as a genre of movies largely tends towards social commentary. Sure, there have always been works like _Transformers_ or _Star Wars_, but as a whole, sci–fi cinema has an established pattern of discussing otherwise highly charged cultural anxieties in a candid, hypothetical fashion. Science fiction films of the fifties and sixties explored common anxieties around nuclear power and war, with monsters like Godzilla or the 50 _Foot Woman _created from experiments gone wrong. The seventies and eighties brought films like _Soylent Green_ and _Blade Runner_, depicting a society threatened by the very advancements it had itself created, but by the time the nineties rolled around, these had evolved into narratives on technology with classics like _Terminator 2_ and _The Matrix_. Oddly enough, most sci–fi films released in the wake of September 11 actually subverted this pattern by avoiding invasion as a subject matter entirely — the only notable exception that comes to mind is _Cloverfield_, and that wasn't released until 2008. Still, there was an noticeable rise in the depiction of surveillance states, alongside a slew of disaster movies like _The Day After Tomorrow_ that were rather unsubtly inspired by a growing debate on climate change.

With all this in mind, I'd like to draw your attention to _Black Mirror_. If you're unfamiliar, _Black Mirror_ is an anthology television series that sits in something of a grey area between science–fiction and horror. The brain child of Charlie Brooker — a name I only mention now so I can chew him out later — _Black Mirror_ first aired on the BBC for two seasons before moving to Netflix for its third and fourth. Like any other science fiction anthology, comparisons have inevitably been drawn between _Black Mirror_ and the genre–defining _Twilight Zone_, but _Black Mirror_ has made a name for itself by choosing to exclusively depict stories about technology. According to Netflix's press kit, _Black Mirror_ "taps into our collective unease with the modern world", literally holding up our phones and computer screens as "a _Black Mirror _reflecting our 21st Century existence back at us". The show is well produced on a technical level, and between a jet black tone and an abundance of twist endings, _Black Mirror _has proven remarkably popular. The problem as I see it, however, is that while _Black Mirror_ may claim to show us a candid portrait of modern society, it does so by merely depicting elements of our cultural anxieties in place of offering actual insight. Science fiction might not be under any sort of obligation to offer meaningful social commentary, but _Black Mirror_ is seemingly so determined to criticise technology that it fails to connect with the very social anxieties that inspired it in the first place. 

To tie all this together, yes, _Black Mirror_ certainly seems like a reaction to the rapid growth of the internet over this past decade. At this point, the idea that phones and social media are causing us to grow isolated from one another is more or less synonymous with the phrase "back in my day," but that doesn't necessarily mean _Black Mirror_'s obvious cynicism is without merit. The trouble is, this cynicism seems to be the only message that _Black Mirror_ is interested in offering. Although most episodes do seem to start with an open mind and an interesting premise, the conflict is consistently driven by the presence of technology, and this seriously limits the direction that any given story can take. On top of this, rather than holding characters responsible for their actions, _Black Mirror_ has a habit of implying that technology is at fault, and this is no more obvious than in an episode like _The Entire History of You_. The episode is centered around an implant that allows characters to replay and project their memories, and although it's unsurprising that a story like this would choose to focus on jealousy and distrust as themes, the way in which the narrative seemingly pins responsibility for this jealousy on the technology itself feels strange. Instead of encouraging its audience to explore the ways that we individually and collectively deal with emotions like jealousy, _Black Mirror_ chooses to absolve its characters of any responsibility by telling us that actually, it was technology's fault the whole time. That's not to say characters aren't punished, but it feels more often than not that they're being punished for their use of technology instead of their actions, with _Playtest_ being a downright bizarre example of this. None of this is necessarily a bad thing, but _Black Mirror_'s compulsive demonization of technology has a habit of drowning out any message or insight it might otherwise have had to offer — and nowhere is this more obvious than in the masterpiece that is _San Junipero_.

Easily the best that the the series has to offer, _San Junipero _exists in remarkable contrast to the rest of the series. It's a stubborn subversion of everything _Black Mirror_ is otherwise known for: there's no moralising on the dangers of the internet, no dark twist ending that serves to upend the moral of the story. It's considerably more optimistic than the rest of the series, too, but I honestly think the reason this episode works so well is that it only uses technology as a way of contextualising the narrative, rather than presenting technology as the driving source of conflict. Brooker's conservative sentiments take a back seat, meaning that by the time the credits roll, the audience is left with something meaningful — not answers, for once, but concepts and themes they're forced to grapple with, and it works in a way no other episode of _Black Mirror_ can hope to match. To me, that might actually be the most frustrating part. If _Black Mirror_ just got out of its own way and stopped trying to hand us the answers it's looking for, there's no doubt in my mind we'd see more episodes like _San Junipero_. As it is, we just have a handful of stories that come _close_ to connecting us with our fears. I mean, what if _Arkangel_ had focused on the dilemmas parents undoubtedly face today around raising children in an age of social media? What if _Hated in the Nation_ had explored the way people handle criticism and consequence over their actions online, instead of literally equating call–out culture with murder? What if _Hang the DJ_ had explored the casual dating scene ushered in by apps like Tinder, examining what it's like to be in a relationship that you don't expect to last? These are issues that many of us have grappled with, but _Black Mirror_ comes so close to helping us confront them, but every time it seems more interested in criticising technology than it is connecting with us.

What this ends up meaning is that rather than offering us the chance to reflect candidly on our anxieties, _Black Mirror_ handles catharsis in a way much more reminiscent of campy horror. Characters indulge in things that we're all at least a little anxious might be wrong, like sex, drugs, or social media, and then we as an audience feel some sort of relief or distress when we finally see their comeuppance — which isn't bad, so much as it is deceptive. _Black Mirror_ claims to hold up a reflection of our modern society, and what you get certainly _feels_ like cutting introspection, but it's not even close. It's just shock tactics, played on repeat, and the worst part is that _Black Mirror_'s approach is only going to further entrench us in our opinions. It doesn't prompt or enable discussion, it doesn't try to find a middle ground or bridge divides, it just wants to scare you into deleting your Facebook.

Which, given recent events concerning Facebook and targeted advertising and the extensive profiles that companies have built on us, given the discomfort around social media that I can visibly see growing around me, it feels important now more than ever to actually have these serious conversations — to actually reflect on the role of technology and the internet in our society. Yet somehow, despite all of this, _Black Mirror_ seems to be the only current major science fiction property that's plugged into these anxieties. Other sci–fi works in recent years like _Westworld_ and _Ex Machina_ have touched on the subject, but instead largely focus the artificial intelligence, meaning that even if they do have insight to offer, _Black Mirror_ is still what we joke about when Google does something sinister. We don't need good sci–fi to deal with issues as a society, of course, but we've come as a culture to connect with others through our entertainment, and the fact that _Black Mirror_ has become the de–facto frame of reference for discussions on the role of technology in our society has made it that much harder to talk about these issues in a meaningful way. There's plenty to be said for _Black Mirror_ as entertainment, but as the loudest voice on these issues right now, we deserve something that aims for more than the only story _Black Mirror_ seems interested in telling.

---

This piece was originally published in the May 2018 issue of The Pelican, under the title _Black Mirror_. The insight that Black Mirror often feels more like horror than it does science fiction was first expressed by Film Crit Hulk, in his article [_Black Mirror Is Kinda Bullshit_](https://birthmoviesdeath.com/2016/10/27/black-mirror-is-kinda-bullshit). 
